Blog post 20220503 (#322)
yast/yast.github.io: _posts/2022-05-03-yast-development-2022-3.md

## Systemd and YaST services

YaST provides three systemd services: YaST2-Firstboot.service, YaST2-Second-Stage.service and autoyast-initscripts.service. Some adjustments in the dependencies of those services was needed in order to make them to work correctly, see for example [this](https://github.com/yast/yast-installation/pull/1033) and [this](https://github.com/yast/yast-installation/pull/1036). Adapting systemd dependencies is not a trivial task. There are always edge scenarios to consider and we plan to continue working in this area.

## Download and Installation Progress

> While installing packages, YaST showed a dialog with quite some information about the steps being performed. For example, the dialog provided information about the downloading progress of each package, what package is being installed, etc. But new libyzpp deployed in SUSE SLE 15 SP3 is able to perform operations in parallel such as downloading, installing or verifying packages. Keeping that rich progress dialog while performing operations in parallel was very challenging. After evaluating different options, finally it was decided to [significantly simplify the progress dialog](https://github.com/yast/yast-yast2/pull/1202), making it compatible with parallel operations. Now, the dialog only contains a progress bar with the information about the total amount of packages pending to install and the [download progress](https://github.com/yast/yast-packager/pull/609). The dialog also shows a [a secondary progress bar](https://github.com/yast/yast-yast2/pull/1250) for long tasks taking more than 4 seconds.

Reviewer: > for long tasks taking more than 4 seconds.

NP: If I got it right, this is not completely true for all tasks taking more than 4 seconds, only for those (selected) ones that initially should be quick enough and does not deserve a specific progress caption for them. That's the case for `Checking file conflicts...`, but not for `Installing packages... (Remaining: XMiB, Y packages)`

> While installing packages, YaST showed a dialog with quite some information about the steps being performed. For example, the dialog provided information about the downloading progress of each package, what package is being installed, etc. But new libyzpp deployed in SUSE SLE 15 SP3 is able to perform operations in parallel such as downloading, installing or verifying packages. Keeping that rich progress dialog while performing operations in parallel was very challenging. After evaluating different options, finally it was decided to [significantly simplify the progress dialog](https://github.com/yast/yast-yast2/pull/1202), making it compatible with parallel operations. Now, the dialog only contains a progress bar with the information about the total amount of packages pending to install and the [download progress](https://github.com/yast/yast-packager/pull/609). The dialog also shows a [a secondary progress bar](https://github.com/yast/yast-yast2/pull/1250) for long tasks taking more than 4 seconds.

Reviewer: > for long tasks taking more than 4 seconds.

NP: If I got it right, this is not completely true for all tasks taking more than 4 seconds, only for those (selected) ones that initially should be quick enough and does not deserve a specific progress caption for them. That's the case for `Checking file conflicts...`, but not for `Installing packages... (Remaining: XMiB, Y packages)`

Author: Yes, you are right. I will explain it better. Thanks!

* Fix [empty helps](https://github.com/yast/yast-storage-ng/pull/1298) in the YaST Expert Partitioner.

* Generation of [translations from XML](https://github.com/yast/yast-devtools/pull/166) files is correctly done now.

* YaST does not fail when using the installation media as part of the target system. This implies changes in different parts of YaST, like [this](https://github.com/openSUSE/linuxrc/pull/286), [this](https://github.com/yast/yast-packager/pull/606) or [this](https://github.com/yast/yast-storage-ng/pull/1290).

* The [cockpit-wicked module](https://github.com/openSUSE/cockpit-wicked/pull/133) was adapted to the latest changes in wicked for managing wireless network configurations.

## D-Installer

Little by little we are able to invest more resources in our [D-Installer](https://github.com/yast/d-installer) side project. We are closer to finish the first iteration of our [road-map](https://github.com/orgs/yast/projects/1). Here is a summary of the main features developed since [the first public release](https://yast.opensuse.org/blog/2022-03-31/d-installer-first-public-release):

* UI improvemets:

>     * [Show more information](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/71) about the target disk.

Reviewer: Not sure now, but I'd say that it was already there in the first public release

Reviewer: ![Screenshot_d-installer-live_2022-05-03_20:04:16](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1691872/166635631-cc239887-02d1-4c98-9f99-78c87769358c.png)

Author: I would keep it if we are not sure. It does not hurt.

Reviewer: I'm sure now, that's why I pasted the screenshot. I run the first public version for checking it and took screenshots. I.e., my first comment is a bit outdated.

>     * [Collapse storage actions](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/72).

Reviewer: Actually, actions were collapsible since the first public release

Reviewer: ![Screenshot_d-installer-live_2022-05-03_20:04:32](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1691872/166635663-1cfb4f6b-28fd-4cff-af14-f3b6b28dede0.png)

Author: Removed.

    * [Add reboot button](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/114).
    * [Ask for confirmation before installing](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/118).
* Other improvements:
    * [D-Bus API to ask questions](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/135) to clients.
    * [Unmount target disk after installing](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/92).
    * [Fix language selector](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/130).

>     * [Convert D-Installer into a real Cockpit module](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/127).

Reviewer: Probably, one of the most relevant changes from the development perspective

    * [Add support for yaml file configuration](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/132).
    * [Add support for remote installation](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/145).

> Our beloved [ruby-dbus](https://github.com/mvidner/ruby-dbus) gem also keeps evolving, supporting all the new features we demand for D-Installer. If you are interested in what is new in this great library, please have a look to its latest [pull requests](https://github.com/mvidner/ruby-dbus/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aclosed). And of course, we encourage you to give D-Installer a try. You can easily test it thanks to the [D-Installer live image](https://build.opensuse.org/package/show/YaST:Head:D-Installer/d-installer-live). We would like to know your opinion.

Reviewer: Should we still encourage using a VM for those tests too?

Author: Ok, good idea. Maybe this deserves a disclaimer.

## Keep in touch

> As commented, we are very busy lately. We promise we will try blogging as frequently as possible with all the news from the YaST land. Meanwhile, do not hesitate to contact us in the usual channels: *yast-devel* and *factory* [mailing lists at openSUSE](https://lists.opensuse.org/), at the *#yast* channel at *libera* IRC or directly commenting on GitHub. See you soon and have a lot of fun!

Reviewer: NP: **Personal opinion**: I'd avoid making promises :sweat_smile: Instead, I prefer to go for something more "realistic" or less compromising,  like (just an idea)

```suggestion
As commented, we are very busy lately and our blogging cadence has been affected, as you already noticed. Hands-down, we will do our best for blogging as frequently as possible with all the news from the YaST land. But please, meanwhile do not hesitate to reach us in the usual channels: *yast-devel* and *factory* [mailing lists at openSUSE](https://lists.opensuse.org/), at the *#yast* channel at *libera* IRC. Or even commenting on Github, whichever suits better to you. See you soon and have a lot of fun!
```

Please, don't get me wrong. I really go for blogging more frequently (let's see if I can help a bit more on that regard), but I just prefer not making promises in short term since we have some quite things ahead.

Author: Well, we only promise that we are going to try it :). But I like your suggestions. Thanks!

---
layout: post
date: 2022-05-03 10:11:12 +00:00
title: YaST Development Report - Chapter 3 of 2022
description: Time for another regular status update from the YaST team, with news about YaST itself
  and D-Installer
permalink: blog/2022-05-03/yast-report-2022-3
tags:
- Distribution
- Factory
- Programming
- Systems Management

> - YaST

Author: test

---

> These last few weeks have been very intensive days in the YaST team. Significant changes are coming to the SUSE and openSUSE worlds. Have you heard about [SUSE ALP](https://lists.opensuse.org/archives/list/project@lists.opensuse.org/thread/N6TTE7ZBY7GFJ27XSDTXRF3MVLF6HW4W/) (Adaptable Linux Platform)? We are taking part of quite some discussions, research and workgroups. But, of course, we continue hardly working in YaST and in our D-Installer side project. So, let's go with a summary of the most interesting features and fixes.

Reviewer 2: > We are taking part **in** quite some discussions, research and workgroups.

Or, for a more positive and proactive spin:

> We are **quite active in** discussions, research and workgroups **about that topic**.

> These last few weeks have been very intensive days in the YaST team. Significant changes are coming to the SUSE and openSUSE worlds. Have you heard about [SUSE ALP](https://lists.opensuse.org/archives/list/project@lists.opensuse.org/thread/N6TTE7ZBY7GFJ27XSDTXRF3MVLF6HW4W/) (Adaptable Linux Platform)? We are taking part of quite some discussions, research and workgroups. But, of course, we continue hardly working in YaST and in our D-Installer side project. So, let's go with a summary of the most interesting features and fixes.

Reviewer 2: > But, of course, we continue hardly working in YaST and in our D-Installer side project.

**Wrong:** That means we are almost not working on them. Not what you mean. ;-)

Better:

> But, of course, we _are continuing to work hard_ **on** YaST and **on** our D-Installer side project.

## One-click Migration

Since openSUSE Leap 15.3, [binary RPMs are shared](https://en.opensuse.org/Portal:Leap/FAQ/ClosingTheLeapGap) between SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 15 and openSUSE Leap. Closing the gap between openSUSE and SUSE makes feasible the migration from openSUSE Leap to SUSE SLE without reinstalling the system completely. [Migrating the system](https://en.opensuse.org/SDB:How_to_migrate_to_SLE) takes some steps, and sometimes manual intervention is required when the process goes wrong. Now, YaST offers [a new client](https://github.com/yast/yast-migration-sle) that simplifies the migration from openSUSE Leap to SUSE SLE, allowing to rollback the system in case that something fails.

## Systemd and YaST Services

> YaST provides three systemd services: *YaST2-Firstboot.service*, *YaST2-Second-Stage.service* and *autoyast-initscripts.service*. Some adjustments in the dependencies of those services was needed in order to make them to work correctly, see for example [this](https://github.com/yast/yast-installation/pull/1033) and [this](https://github.com/yast/yast-installation/pull/1036). Adapting systemd dependencies is not a trivial task. There are always edge scenarios to consider and we plan to continue working in this area.

Reviewer 2: > Some adjustments in the dependencies of those services **were** needed

> ~~in order~~ to make them to work correctly

> edge scenarios to consider **,** and we plan

(Added a comma)

## Download and Installation Progress

> While installing packages, YaST showed a dialog with quite some information about the steps being performed. For example, the dialog provided information about the downloading progress of each package, what package is being installed, etc. But the new version of libyzpp deployed in SUSE SLE 15 SP3 is able to perform operations in parallel such as downloading, installing or verifying packages. Keeping that rich progress dialog while performing operations in parallel was very challenging. After evaluating different options, finally it was decided to [significantly simplify the progress dialog](https://github.com/yast/yast-yast2/pull/1202), making it compatible with parallel operations. Now, the dialog only contains a progress bar with the information about the total amount of packages pending to install and the [download progress](https://github.com/yast/yast-packager/pull/609). The dialog also shows [a secondary progress bar](https://github.com/yast/yast-yast2/pull/1250) in a popup for some theoretically quick tasks taking longer than they should.

Reviewer 2: > new version of libyzpp deployed in SUSE SLE 15 SP3

Shouldn't that be SP4? And _SUSE SLE_ is duplicating the _SUSE_ part (SLE = SUSE Linux Enterprise). I think our readers should be familiar enough with _SLE_ to know what it is even when abbreviated.

Author: Right, SP4. The description of the PBI was wrong.

## Other Interesting Improvements

> * Making AutoYaST more robust when [setting the owner of *autoinst_files* files](https://github.com/yast/yast-installation/pull/1034).

Reviewer 2: I had to look that one up, so probably our readers also won't know what exactly that is.

Maybe

"setting the owner of files for the *autoinst_files* step"

* Improvements in the way [YaST imports users](https://github.com/yast/yast-users/pull/361) from other systems.

* Packages [yast2-nis-server](https://github.com/yast/yast-nis-server/pull/30) and [yast2-nis-clients](https://github.com/yast/yast-nis-client/pull/63) were dropped from openSUSE Tumbleweed, although they are still maintained for openSUSE Leap and SUSE SLE.

* YaST was adapted to [call external commands](https://github.com/yast/yast-iscsi-client/pull/113) in a more robust way. Research and more details can be found [here](https://github.com/yast/yast-yast2/tree/master/doc/yast-invoking-external-commands.md).

> * AutoYaST [does not export the resume kernel parameter](https://github.com/yast/yast-bootloader/pull/666) anymore, and it only imports such a parameter if the indicated device exists. [AutoYaST documentation](https://github.com/SUSE/doc-sle/pull/1160) was extended to explain this new behavior.

Reviewer 2: > **The** [AutoYaST documentation](https://github.com/SUSE/doc-sle/pull/1160) was extended

> * Fix [empty helps](https://github.com/yast/yast-storage-ng/pull/1298) in the YaST Expert Partitioner.

Reviewer 2: > Fix**ed missing help texts**

> * Generation of [translations from XML](https://github.com/yast/yast-devtools/pull/166) files is correctly done now.

Reviewer 2: > Generation

**Generating**

> * YaST does not fail when using the installation media as part of the target system. This implies changes in different parts of YaST, like [this](https://github.com/openSUSE/linuxrc/pull/286), [this](https://github.com/yast/yast-packager/pull/606) or [this](https://github.com/yast/yast-storage-ng/pull/1290).

Reviewer 2: > YaST does not fail **anymore** when

> * The [cockpit-wicked module](https://github.com/openSUSE/cockpit-wicked/pull/133) was adapted to the latest changes in wicked for managing wireless network configurations.

Reviewer 2: > was adapted to the latest changes in _wicked_ for managing

(Make "wicked" cursive)

## D-Installer

> Little by little we are able to invest more resources in our [D-Installer](https://github.com/yast/d-installer) side project. We are closer to finish the first iteration of our [road-map](https://github.com/orgs/yast/projects/1). Here is a summary of the main features developed since [the first public release](https://yast.opensuse.org/blog/2022-03-31/d-installer-first-public-release):

Reviewer 2: > able to invest more resources in**to** our

> Little by little we are able to invest more resources in our [D-Installer](https://github.com/yast/d-installer) side project. We are closer to finish the first iteration of our [road-map](https://github.com/orgs/yast/projects/1). Here is a summary of the main features developed since [the first public release](https://yast.opensuse.org/blog/2022-03-31/d-installer-first-public-release):

Reviewer 2: > road-map

_roadmap_ (one word; preferred) or _road map_ (two words; falling out of use), but not _road-map_ with a hyphen.

Yes, English is weird. ;-)

> * UI improvemets:

Reviewer 2: > UI improveme**n**ts

    * [Show more information](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/71) about the target disk.
    * [Add reboot button](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/114).
    * [Ask for confirmation before installing](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/118).
* Other improvements:
    * [D-Bus API to ask questions](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/135) to clients.
    * [Unmount target disk after installing](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/92).
    * [Fix language selector](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/130).
    * [Convert D-Installer into a real Cockpit module](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/127).
    * [Add support for yaml file configuration](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/132).
    * [Add support for remote installation](https://github.com/yast/d-installer/pull/145).

> Our beloved [ruby-dbus](https://github.com/mvidner/ruby-dbus) gem also keeps evolving, supporting all the new features we demand for D-Installer. If you are interested in what is new in this great library, please have a look to its latest [pull requests](https://github.com/mvidner/ruby-dbus/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aclosed). And of course, we encourage you to give D-Installer a try. You can easily test it thanks to the [D-Installer live image](https://build.opensuse.org/package/show/YaST:Head:D-Installer/d-installer-live). We would like to know your opinion.

Reviewer 2: > have a look ~~to~~ **at**

Done wrong in daily use in the YaST world, still it's wrong: It's always "have a look **at**", never "to".

Please, remember that D-Installer is an **experimental installer** and it is still under development. We recommend to use a virtual machine to prevent any possible data loss.

## Keep in Touch

> As commented, we are very busy lately and our blogging cadence has been affected. We will do our best for blogging as frequently as possible with all the news from the YaST land. Meanwhile, do not hesitate to reach us in the usual channels: `yast-devel` and `factory` [mailing lists at openSUSE](https://lists.opensuse.org/), and at the `#yast` channel at *libera* IRC. Or even directly commenting on GitHub, whichever suits better to you. See you soon and have a lot of fun!

Reviewer 2: > whichever suits better to you

Should be

"whichever suits you better"
